hello hello everyone welcome to sorbon
talks I'm anujia I'm from the Stellar
development foundation and I'm super
excited to bring on our amazing sorbon
developer Lee and our Deborah lead Tyler
onto stream hi everyone hi friends
all right so uh this is Lee's first time
on stream with me and also it's like my
second stream and we're considering
making this into a stream a series of
some sort so if y'all want to do that
let me know in the comments
um because I I would love to if y'all
want to see me more on stream and Tyler
on stream we can all alternate Tyler
but um yeah hey everyone so we're gonna
start off by playing a game of chrome
Dino I don't know Tyler have you ever
played Chrome Dino
all the times that my internet goes down
out here in the country
my score is still not very good but I do
like a little Chrome Dino exactly so
we're gonna start off by competing with
Lee Tyler and myself and see who gets
the high score
um on Chrome Dyno and then we will jump
right it's like ultimate beta switch
we're gonna play Chrome dino games
you're actually sorry we're just gonna
start playing Chrome Dino and uh figure
out who's the best from Dino Champion
it's Stellar all right so Tyler I'm
gonna let you start first
um and we're gonna see how you do
oh my gosh we're not gonna do these
concurrently all right here we go yeah
we're gonna see who does
we're all watching
okay
in the meantime it's gonna soak up all
five minutes here I'm gonna start
getting my practice in I don't think
it's gonna take all five minutes Tyler
you can't be that good
I don't know my skills oh
but hey Kanye Nest conniness uh wrath is
in here there you go I'm using here and
hello hello feeling stressed watching
this right that's I died there we go
right when Raph said feeling stressed
watching this Tyler
you know all right Lee are you ready for
this I'm ready so uh 3 55 3 55. okay all
right I'm frustrated there's two more
zeros after that like people actually
are getting that high
foreign
to it
the double jump uh speaker
busted
Okay Tyler takes the eye
I'm like
we'll have good RAF are you gonna make
us an nft for whoever uh
his high score on this
all right here we go
wait why is it oh okay here's cactuses
it's not even fair you have to run like
100 feet before you even hit it
all right all right all right we're
getting there that additional like
twinkle sound whenever you jump over or
I guess whenever you get like a hundred
or something
it's very stressful okay better than Lee
I'm proud of that
all right sweet so we could play another
round or we could keep going I think we
should just kick it off how do you feel
about that yeah let's get rolling all
right so a couple different
announcements uh while we get settled in
is basically today's stream will be
about
um one two things actually so we have an
instant Dev environment set up for
sorbon so if you're someone like me who
is basically never touched Russ till
soroban started
um and is just now getting started and
has come from like a web to like react
python background and you're like how do
I freaking get started on Russ well we
have an answer for you rightly the get
pod answer so we're gonna share that
today
um with all of you and do a couple
different demos with it and this is your
chance to ask sorbon Dev Lee uh I keep
saying that Lee I hope you're okay with
me calling you the the Thor of on death
League
um but a q a with him uh I posted in our
um Discord a link and I will share that
here as well but it's basically a link
for you to
um put in your questions as you get them
you're also more than welcome to share
them on the stream uh we'll see this
chat on stream as well
um so whatever works for you uh use it
as you like and if you actually want to
come on stream uh let me know in the
chat on the Discord which is the hashtag
live chat
um which is the live chat Channel and I
will uh DM you the link to join us on
stream actually and bring you on but
that will be a bit later on straight so
I'll let Tyler kick it off
um go on go on in super yeah so um as we
mentioned last week I kind of uh dove
into sort of on myself for the first
time a couple weeks ago
um I I was very intimidated by it I was
also very busy
um and the the idea of trying to learn
uh rust was kind of like no thanks think
I'll save that for later
um
but uh necessity kind of pushed itself
you know okay where everybody's learning
sorobon now and this is kind of the
thing that I've wanted ever since I
found Stellar way way back and wanted to
do something that Stellar didn't have an
operation for
uh the ability to have a smart contract
running uh behind a single Stellar
operation so we'll get into the
nitty-gritty of exactly what's going on
but I found it to be far far easier to
kind of get up and running than I
thought it would be most of these rust
smart contracts are actually really
um small compact a lot of your
programming interfaces uh will actually
be on the front end which is typical of
smart contract development
um so it's not that hard and now that
we've introduced the get pod thing so I
was like I was coming two weeks ago and
then I found get pod and oh my goodness
uh like you just you just click a link
and you have a full rust sarobon
environment right inside your browser
it's it's the
um vs code editor which is the one I use
every day anyway
um which is amazing which is kind of
this call out to we're going to be doing
Stellar Quest anybody is familiar with
Stellar Quest our next Stellar Quest is
going to be a sarobon quest and it's
going to be all done right inside of a
git POG so we're not a Kanye we're not
going to have to answer all of these um
hey I'm using Windows and can't figure
out how to install rust we're just going
to focus on the sorobond pieces not on
the environment rust future net
configurations it's uh kind of compiling
all this into the quick wins of just
figuring out getting our feet wet
um building out smart contracts so I am
going to bring my screen up and by me I
mean a new here bring my screen up to
um
introduce something that I think Lee you
added maybe last night inside of our
Docs
if you go to any of these examples they
now have an open in
get pod link
which will open up all of these
different examples right inside the the
VM the get pod VM where you can run
these examples right inside of our uh
example soroban examples repo it opens
up that repo inside of a gitpod which is
amazing uh we're not going to do that
right off the bat though I'm going to
I'm going to open it up with we've got a
sort of on Pioneer Quest we're actually
still building this out but I thought
I'd go ahead and share this this is kind
of the idea is this is going to be a
pretty big deviation from what we've
normally done with Stellar Quest where
you're playing it with laboratory you're
doing it in quest.stellar.org now you're
going to be doing the class right inside
of a get pod which will be a little bit
disorienting right especially for people
like nisho who get um very angsty and
start clicking buttons when they don't
quite know what they do yet so this is
going to be allow you to kind of
familiarize yourself with the
environment and that's we're going to
walk through today is this kind of get
pod environment I'm going to walk you
through
uh this is not going to I'm not going to
try very hard not to leak any of our
quests in this repo so the actual repos
the secret repo good luck finding it
um but this particular one
you can go ahead and find and open up
I'll be adding uh Elliot's writing some
really good um readme material I think
he's even going to do a video you'll get
to see Elliot on screen that'll be fun
uh walking through the get pod so you'll
have no excuses to know exactly how to
uh compete in the in the Stellar Quest
whenever we get these these live
hopefully in November
okay so if you click this open and get
pod that's gonna launch your new get pod
instance I've it takes a couple minutes
to uh spin one of these up not minutes
it takes a few seconds to spin one of
these up but depending on whether
there's another pre-build running or
um what have you so I've already got one
stood up here
uh in my
my browser here this is probably quite
tiny so let me increase the size of that
slightly
um so what you're seeing here basically
you've got a couple of different areas
of navigation if you're familiar with
code editors IDs at all particularly vs
code this is going to at least not feel
completely uh foreign to you but let me
let me just go ahead and walk through a
couple of these items and then we'll
begin interacting with them
make sure to be keeping in Your Mind
questions write those down in notes or
something or that type form that a
newfia sent out so we can answer those
later on particularly ones that I won't
be able to answer because I am still a
newbie like everybody except for Lee
um all right
so probably one of the most uh critical
pieces other than the actual code that
we'll be looking through is your um bash
terminal tab over here so I've actually
got a futurenet that spins up with this
get pod and so if you were to go to like
the ports over here this little ports
tab you can open up
this is actually delivering right from
inside this get pod you've got your
futurenet we can see the latest ingested
Ledger uh one zero zero three one so uh
we're syncing successfully with the
future net that's amazing that all gets
configured for you
um if you ever want to explore like okay
that's fancy but it's a lot of magic
inside of this git pod is the commands
that actually spin up these different um
terminals so you can see exactly what
commands are being run so this is how we
actually run up that
um that Docker quick start saurabhand
Dev Docker image so that's pretty that's
pretty cool
the other two things we've got going on
are this futurenet bash and a sandbox
bash so these other two terminal Windows
uh this first one is one will be we'll
interact with both but this one the
sandbox is kind of this safe local
playground doesn't interact at all with
that future net that we have and then
this this
futurenet one this one's connected with
environment variables uh attached right
into the um into the bash window with
all the environment variables we'll need
to actually interact with this future
net that we have running so you can see
these environment variables running on
this futurenet CLI so those get passed
into the environment on that bash so
um it's to try and help you if you
accidentally like want to run a future
net inside sandbox you'll just have to
pass these environment variables
yourself and if you want to run sandbox
in the future net you'd have to toss
those environment variables so if you
end up running into errors or issues
pass in them manually or
um
you can just look over here and try and
toggle back and forth every now and then
you will definitely get boogered and
maybe just restart your git pod uh or
figure out the magic from inside of this
gitpod yaml file for the commands that
were actually run to spin those up
you can use zoom in a little bit
um into the screen not everyone is as
old as you are new here darn
uh yes good good point
um
there we go much better or even Kanye
can see it yep
um all right
so those are our terminal Windows we've
only got three running up in here
um
let's go through uh we've talked about
the environments the the future net here
so this is the this is a quick start
image that basically spins up your own
like Watcher node
um but it's connected directly to the
same future net that's running that you
can like access in uh laboratory right
now for example so things that we do
inside the future net here will will
show up uh in like if we were to explore
operations for a particular account
so that's all quite nice
the main obvious thing that we're all
here to do though is to actually
um build and test and run
um contracts and this is where we start
to touch a actual rust code I've only
got one Quest up in here right now uh
really to kind of emphasize just the
environment and learning that bit first
I just pulled the hello world example
um from the example the soroban examples
repository so that's the one that's
building up up here so if we run you
could run cargo
I guess uh make build but um for people
that are maybe unfamiliar with the make
file it's basically if you're coming
from the JavaScript world it's just like
the scripts inside the package so it's
basically just going to run
this command
I'm going to allow pastes because I'm
not my own hacker
um sweet so that was nice and quick less
than
um a half of a second
and that'll put that built
wasm file so you write rust and then it
compiles down to a wasm executable
that's the thing that you'll actually
deploy or run
on the contract so a lot of times when
you've got the sorobon CLI and you're
calling something you'll be referencing
this particular wasm file which Speaking
of
saurabhan you can
we've got uh those installed the the
sorobon command if you're like okay well
that's also magic how'd you install that
guy
um Lee has built us a nice little Docker
image
that pulls in the default uh get pod
Docker image loads up all the stuff we
need for that and then it installs
things like sorobon and cargo hack and
some other things that we might need I'm
actually working on a stellar Quest CLI
um
so the you can run all of your Stellar
quests right from the command line I'll
also install that as an executable
inside of this Docker file as well so
between the get pod and the gitpod
docker file most of the magic is
contained within there
which is helpful to know
for the pro users out there so anyway
we've got our sort of on command line
got loads of
um nice sub commands to run here like
invoke inspect
uh all those wonderful things let's go
ahead and really quick so we went ahead
and uh we um bundled built the the
contract so it exists you can see right
here 13 lines of rust code
to say things like hello something which
okay fair enough that's not that crazy
um but usually there isn't that much
rust code to actually pull off some
pretty complex logic like if you look at
some of the I think we've even got an
amm example in there we've got lots of
examples and I don't think any of them
ever really start to cross Beyond like
200 300 lines of code most rust
contracts are just very Compact and
small and once you understand two things
first
rust is actually
um
really like when you run things they'll
break but they often will tell you
exactly what you did wrong
um but also a lot of the rust stuff
um is contained within the standard
library and so a lot of the things you
might need to learn or do would be
inside the standard library but we've
got this flag here that says no standard
Library
many times that will bite you if you're
if you're very experienced in react uh
you're like where's all my strings and
map hash maps and stuff
um
but where there is no standard Library
there's the sorobon SDK
um it's nice because if you're coming
from JavaScript and you're just trying
to learn this thing there's actually
less rust stuff you can do which keeps
that scope of things to learn quite
minimal and keeps all of the
documentation right inside of that
sarabon.stellar.org forward slash docs
all the things you need to know are kind
of within that domain which is super
nice
um all right sweet so I'm going to see
if I can remember how to actually run
this contract so we've got it built so
we should be able to actually call it
I'm going to make sure I'm in my sandbox
CLI
and if I remember my homework we should
be able to do sorobon invoke and
whenever you get lost you can add that H
flag and it will tell you the different
options that you have available so we
are going to need a an ID and this uh
wasm location and then if it's got
although we need to call the specific
function
and then any arguments that it might
contain
if we were running it on the RPC we
would either need to pass these flags or
they will be pre-filled you'll notice if
I run this exact same command
soroban in Vogue help
um these sarobon are these RPC secrets
are already filled in for us so that
we'll use those by default if we're
using this particular
um bash tab
which is nice
okay
so we got that
let's go into we need an ID which we'll
just pass it one doesn't really matter
because we're going to be calling it
locally right off of the target I'm at
root in my directory so I should just be
able to go Target
so this is going to be our actual wasm
file that we're targeting
Target
wasn't
releases and I think the name of this
was soroban contract
Blossom the argument
I guess before we call our argument we
need a function what function are we
going to call
the functions we have available to us
are a big fat stack of one of them uh
and it's hello
and
as per tradition we will call the
argument with world and when we run that
we get the response just like it told us
it would print out the symbol hello and
then the two that we passed it which is
also this symbol which is the argument
that we included so we start with this
default environment argument and the
second one is that argument that we
passed and you could include other
arguments if you wanted but we just had
this one world and then it's going to
print back this vector
hello world
fantastic that's amazing you might say
but that's not actually a network
fair enough let's see if we can copy the
same thing over to our future net
brilliant okay so we before we can
invoke though the function contract
actually needs to exist on chain so
let's go ahead and deploy I think that's
a command
it is indeed
um we need to deploy it with the wasm
file and I think that's basically all we
have to do because our secret key RPC
nodes Network passphrases are already
filled in for us so deploy
Verizon from the target
1132 release
Urban
that's going to deploy that straight on
to our future net
uh amazing so this is our uh contract
hash so if we wanted to go and invoke
I'm going to do the
crazy thing of just copying this moving
it over to our future net
and the only thing we need to change
here
assume that rebuilt a good futurenet
he honestly didn't build the future now
there's lots of people involved
you also want to remove the uh the
wasn't
I need to remove the wasn't this is what
this is yep
passing an actual ID
we don't need that
we should send that straight over to the
Future net and we get Hello World back
now I know like many of you you're
thinking well that's fancy
show it to me in laboratory well I can't
actually run this in laboratory yet but
what I can do uh is show you the
operation that we just committed
and I'm going to do that by committing
the cardinal sin
of looking up that secret key that I use
so let's actually let's do something a
little bit different
let's generate a Brand New Key pair on
futurenet which all of them are the same
so let's just paint that I'm going to
write this down in the notes that I have
over here so I don't forget it
right
sweet so now we're going to go and we're
going to deploy this again
this time we're going to use a new
secret key
that one that we just included so that I
don't have to commit the Cardinals in
deriving a public key from the secret
key on stream
which I did just generate a key on
screen but that's fine it's a test net
whatever okay so we committed that
submitted that so if we right now if we
went and looked up our explore endpoints
operations for account
and we just order this by descending
we're going to notice that brand new
operation invoke host function that's
really the only operation that classic
Stellar has kind of added and it's um
very cryptic and hard to understand
which is why we have Lee here let's go
ahead and call another one
so we did the deploy
now we can do the invoke
got a new contract ID so let's put that
in
unless we pass our new
put that right here new secret key
there's nothing fancy with the secret
key it's just a stellar thing you're
just signing the transaction that you're
going to submit to the Future net
uh but rather than having to like submit
an xdr or something you can just pass in
the secret key as an argument and it
will do all of the signing and
submitting
um for you so there we go we got our
hello world back and if we run this
again we should see two
host invoke host functions so that was
the one that actually built the or uh
submitted the contract
create contract with Source account is
the function and this one is host
function host function invoke contract
uh but again uh Wicked
um obfuscated behind the Allure of what
in the world does this xdr actually have
behind it
so that's kind of where my demo ends
this is like to me this is again kind of
mind-blowing where you can build these
things relatively quickly and easily
whether it's on futurenet and actually
able to explore it inside of horizon or
in your sandbox right we could just go
in here and do a public function that
reads something or maybe it saves some
data all those other examples that we
were showing but
like it's actually pretty simple to
write a contract and then deploy it run
it and see it in laboratory just like
you would do with anything else you
might do with Stellar the only
difference is what we had before was
here's an operation that is make a
payment okay but I want to do something
fancy too bad you can make a payment
with this operation now we have an
operation that is invoke smart contract
which does whatever the heck you want to
inside of whatever the functions are
behind the contract that was uploaded so
it's like this um do whatever you want
operation uh in stellar and my goodness
I've wanted that for a long time and to
actually see it working and it's kind of
simple and you've got this nice git pod
environment to do all this stuff
I don't know about you but I think I'm
going to quit working for SDF and start
writing smart contracts because this
this I haven't been this excited about
actually building on Stellar since I
found Stellar way back in 2014. this is
amazing and and
again like you're discovering Stellar
for the first time in 2014 like okay
sweet I think at the time there's like
12 things you could do with stellar and
then now there's like 22 or something
now there's an infinite number of things
you can do with stellar and that is
incredible like I was super excited
before just finding stellar
now I mean this is this is this is
something else and
um I don't know I'm I can't wait to
start writing like nft weird nft smart
contracts all that stuff that I was
trying to do with Stellar turrets that
was very difficult and lots of Hoops to
jump through
um now now this is this I can't wait to
just start writing weird contracts my
mind is it's been hard to shut down
um for all the crazy things I want to do
um I might have to create a pseudonym
for Sora bonathon so I can uh try and
swoop in on some of those prizes uh okay
enough with me talking
you should show um before you before you
take it away you should show you how
easy it is to write tests yeah
I have no idea how to write a test I've
never written a rest test in my life so
maybe uh is there what's in the test
file is that this one right here
yes this is a real real simple test
that's just calling that hello function
exactly the same way that you invoked on
the command line and there's a little
tiny text at the top of the function run
test if you click that
click the run test
it's going to run it here in your
browser
so you can individually run like when
you're running the entire test like is
this now individually taking that
component and running a test on it
please okay yeah exactly is that what
this mod test thing is how does it link
between the list
in the test file
uh the mod test is just telling the
project that
oh no what's going on here
um he's just telling the compiler that
that other test rust file should be
included because
that all the rust files are not included
by default they'll have to be referenced
from that that lib
um
and it looks like we got some sort of
bug in our GitHub setup
if you if you run a cargo clean Tyler
and then just try clicking that run test
again
no debug it live
is this like the most satisfying thing
of giffpod I feel I mean it's satisfying
anytime to watch anything compiled but
this is really satisfying
This thing always gives me anxiety
because it's like yes I've waited for 30
seconds to get to 142 and then I'll be
an error and like oh shoot now I gotta
fix that and then wait another five
yeah there's a lot of dependencies
because this what this test is doing is
there's only what like five six lines of
code here
um but that M default that's at the
beginning of the test is actually the
sorbent environment and it's not uh a
mock environment it's the actual cyberon
environment that gets embedded in the
Stellar core nodes and we're using it
here in the test so when you're writing
rust tests here uh in your contract you
are actually testing your contract
um in much the same way that it will be
running on chain uh so you have all the
same things available to you uh you can
even do things like integration tests
across other contracts so you can import
another contract that you're calling or
maybe several contracts you're calling
and you can write tests using your
contract and all of those contracts
together and you know see for real
how it's actually going to behave well
that's so cool that's is that that's one
of the advantages of having like the
entire thing be being written in Rust
where you get this rust environment that
can be like pulled out of actually
running it in core but it's the actual
environment that is running in core
exactly
yay our test passed
all of that for one test okay it needs
to be like capital okay I found this
yeah it's like okay with an exclamation
um but that could also mean it's not
okay but haha no anyone
um anyways uh lee there's a fun question
which is is this a smart contract to
find out what these Halloween costume
will be this year
yeah I'm gonna I'm gonna dress up as
hello Dev
it's not a bad idea
yeah we're gonna have to have a little
bit smarter contract very very smart
smart
guess well at least Halloween costumes
right
but Tyler so you wanted to ask Lee some
questions I believe yeah so
one of like my main question is I'm even
as I'm writing Stiller Quest quests one
of the things I'm gonna have to do is
okay
um people are doing their quests they
they do their hello world like one of
the first quests the spoiler alert might
be to call
um hello world
um I know I can find
that they did that
but I don't know how to prove that in
this that they actually submitted hello
world and I'm guessing it's something to
do with one of these parameters
um maybe something with the footprint
can you just like walk us through a
am I going to be able to do like build a
stellar Quest off of the data that I'm
getting inside of the operations to
check if what someone submitted was what
I expected
because this xdr is not immediately
helpful to me and then secondarily to
that the heck is a footprint
yeah these are good questions can you
can you zoom in a little bit I'm sorry
it's pretty
pretty small uh for me um the yeah we've
got
three Fields here and uh you're right
they don't really tell us a whole lot on
the surface there's two tools we can use
to understand like what
this mumble jumble
um words are we can either use the
laboratory uh whenever you've got in
future net mode so if you want to open
that up in another tab we can try
putting that into into the laboratory
you can also use the Sovereign CLI it
also has a sub command where you can
just paste this and it would print out
this is what the value is
um
but maybe we can use the laboratory a
lot of people so yeah this is this is
laboratory right here do you want me to
copy one of these xdr values over to the
view xdr yes okay so I just copied
this one with type object object
yeah so what you want to do is grab the
XTL type it should be SC Val if you look
for SC Val it'll be down there deep in
the
and okay it's not actually rendering
something that's super useful here
that's well I mean I mean maybe that's
that's
b64 yeah base64 decode that
XYZ
is a
does this convert to okay wait
you're singing strange URLs okay
waiter oh no what is the what is this
Valley
we should have started with the second
dude I don't remember okay we can start
with the second time do the second one
first I'm gonna try to see if I can
remember what
the first one is and why we can't decode
it oh the first one's the contract ID
oh so it's a hack or the contract
function or something like that so let
me let me uh run my super powerful other
VM called run kit and do buffer
um
a64 and then two string
it's probably a hexia
that's our contract ID Maybe
ish
[Music]
wish that was
that was not uh that was the actual xdr
value this was the
a64d
so that's our contract hash right there
all right so that's uh one problem
solved now we need um this one
Sim
yes let's have a look at what that is
View xdr
versus also an sc value this is also an
essay file so if you copy that Sim value
and stick it into the base64 decoder it
should that should come out as a string
all right without the hex
hello
sick all right what's uh
wait that was our
that was our first argument right by
default oh that was the output no no no
that's the input that's the function
name the parameter was the contract ID
the second parameter was the function
we're calling and then all the
parameters after that are should be the
arguments
fingers crossed everybody
wait I gotta gotta turn it out of the
xdr into
a64.
864 will it say World question mark
I can write my checks
haha everyone you'll have to actually do
what the challenge says or you're busted
amazing and is it almost always so when
I look at view xdr this thing just got
absolutely enormous
are there many other things that people
will need to be aware of or is SC Val
kind of cover most of our ground here
scal covers any any value that that's
being used as like an input or an output
or unlike of a contract function as well
as anything that's being stored so if
you're storing something on chain some
data to look up again later maybe light
balances things like that they're all
ultimately going to be stored inside our
cval and SC value is really a union of
lots of other types so here we can see
this RC valve is a symbol there are
integers there's like byte arrays Maps
vectors
um
begins they all fall under that scale
I spent too long trying to figure out
how to decode this and I just
just had to get on stream that's all I
had to do
that makes a ton of sense all right
fantastic well now I know how to bust
everybody for passing the arguments and
making sure they actually submit the
right thing
next the heck is a footprint this is
also an xdr
is this I really hope it has something
to do with Bigfoot but I'm guessing it
doesn't you can try decoding that if you
want I don't remember what the type is
exactly it's probably The Ledger
footprint is the type
um
there's a contract ID and this this is
not necessarily particularly interesting
uh for this specific contract because
this contract doesn't access any data or
anything like that so what well
footprint is is
um it's us telling uh the runtime uh
what data the contract May write to or
read from
and the reason this exists is because uh
we don't uh we want the runtime to know
what data might the contract will need
to be accessing because that helps us do
things like run contracts uh
concurrently at the same time
so
um we're building sarban with the
advantage that we've we've seen other
blockchains already build
um you know smart contract runtimes and
we know that scaling uh blockchains is
um is difficult and so we're planning
that from the get-go with Saruman and
one of the foot the footprint is like
part of the the idea is that when you
invoke a contract you define what data
might need to be accessed by the
contract and then the runtime knows how
to paralyze contracts that don't need to
access or write to the same data
so in this contract invocation
if we looked at the code you'd say it's
not accessing any data so why is there
there's one entry here there's one
read-only entry the contract data and
the key is not particularly
descriptive it's a static
IC and what that is is the contract code
itself so we're saying that with this
contractification the only contract data
it needs to read or write is the actual
contract code that gets loaded into the
runtime
but if you were writing if you had a
contract where you were updating a
balance uh you would need to include The
Ledger key in this footprint for the
balance that was planned to be updated
I think that's making sense
I know they're so yeah
there's a question here so what is the
footprint of a function that uses an
environment invoke contract
all right
yeah that's a good question uh it should
be it'll be the footprint of whatever
that other contract requires so at the
very least it's going to require the
contract code so there'll be like
another entry like what we see here on
screen except the contract ID won't be
uh the calling contractor will be the
contract that's going to be called and
then if that contract needs to go and
access any data uh you would also need
to being pre-included you need to be
predetermining what data is going to be
accessed and including that in the
football
is there a limit to like the depth that
that can go before it becomes difficult
I mean there will be limits for
um the runtime especially like once it
gets to pubnet I think we're still
figuring out a lot of what those you
know those levers should be set up uh so
for future net I mean future net doesn't
have fees enabled either so
um you know these are things which we're
building out and they'll they'll be in
future
future future net iterations
yeah I think a question that maybe
arises uh from this is you know I said
that the footprint is something that you
have to predetermine you as the person
building the transaction here to go and
figure out what the footprint should be
and that maybe can be a bit of a
daunting task and so
um we have this thing called pre-flight
or simulation where you can submit a
transaction without the footprint so no
food required and it's not executed on
chain it's just it's simulated and then
you get back it basically gives you back
the footprint so you can then just go
and submit the transaction with that
footprint
so you don't really have to determine it
yourself I know when I was looking at
the network requests inside of
um
uh Paul's example dap there was loads of
those preflights whenever something was
happening to go and find what the actual
submission call should look like and
it's also the way that you do
um read requests so if you're if you
don't actually need to submit something
networking you just need to get data out
of the network you can use those
pre-flight requests to um grab
information from The Ledger from The
Horizon endpoint without actually having
to submit the transaction
which I thought was kind of kind of cool
there are a few other questions here it
says like why have one type of uh SC
value for everything architecture-wise
question mark
um that's a good question I think uh the
values get used in a lot of places where
um you know like as function inputs
function outputs and we really need one
type uh that's going to contain all
those other types
um
yeah that's what I got that flavor of
design really comes from like the way
that xdr like the the Stella Network
uses xdr for structuring
um all of the data they get stored and
uh that's just a really common way of
solving that problem in the XTR
[Music]
um
I'm trying to see there are a few other
questions here uh that I guess we can
shift a little bit but uh it says how
should one think when writing Forum on
contracts that involves not mucking up
keep it small and apparently write good
tests because I made it a long way and
then I had to write a test and it broke
so
Rico tests
um start out really small
I don't know have fun right right now
it's like on futurenet so play around
learn what you're doing
um
but yeah Nisha you'll figure it out
I believe in you do the Stellar Quest
that'll that'll go a long way sorbonne
Quest you mean Stellar requests saravan
quest Quest version series
um I do have another question
and this is particularly coming from a
JavaScript engineer perspective
is is there a way to like watch
contracts so that as you make changes it
kind of runs tests and compiles in like
as you save files or is that something
you have to like always be building
always be testing
is the idea that you just kind of Click
run test every time you update some code
sort of thing you you fix your tests you
write your code you run tests again
what's the what's the development flow
tend to be when making changes
yeah I mean there's a couple of options
here it really comes down to you know
what you like to do uh if you're a vs
code user there should be
um my shortcut codes are customized so I
won't say what it is because I don't
know what the default is but there's a
shortcut code you can press
um to run the last test or run the test
under your current cursor and so a
common development flow is you just keep
hitting that key after you've made some
changes and it'll go run the tests you
care about in that moment there's
another great tool called cargo watch
which you can it may actually be
installed in this GitHub I think I think
if I saw it was installed in the docker
file and if you use cargo watch
by default it probably just builds and
that may not
be where we want but if you
um I think it's like cargo watch space
Dash X space test and that will just run
the tests every time you change the
files
cool yeah so this I think by default it
just right just builds and then tests
yeah that makes sense
and I will definitely help it's just a
very foreign environment
but it's not a poor one it's just a very
foreign environment for a JavaScript
developer so knowing what that narrative
is like for actively working on a
contract
um is an important one
um
that was just a link that I wanted to
share well I guess Kanye West wanted to
share yeah if there are Rush developers
in the chat that have the ways that they
run these a submit it to the
sorobonathon because I need to know how
to build these faster and uh and B put
those in in chat with links and such
yeah it's one of the things I love about
the rust Community is it's very aware of
how hard it is to learn rust and so
people are very eager to share all the
things that they do and the tips and
tricks they have for getting up to speed
and actually building contracts and
stuff
um
yes so uh you can yeah you can write
unit tests but you can also write
integration tests in the sense that if
your contract is using other other
contracts
um you can download those contracts at
the moment you just you have to manually
download them as a DOT wasn't file in
the future you know hopefully we'll have
some like better mechanics around that
where they can just be automatically
downloaded but uh yeah you report that
wasn't file you can register that
contract in your test so it's there
registered in the environment just as if
it had been deployed on chain and then
your your contract when you're running
its tests can be calling through to it
so you don't have to be you don't have
to set up mocks you don't have to set up
you know these fake tests with your if
you're
contractors interacting with all these
other
um other things and
we don't have this implemented today but
um the environment can have data
pre-loaded into it that environment that
we saw in the tests and so we do want to
build toolings to to do things like take
data that's on chain like if you know
you basically take like a specific
Ledger and then you could write tests
that actually use
contracts that are actually that have
been actually deployed as well as data
that's been actually that actually
existed on let on The Ledger at that
point in time
so
there's another question that came in
through the
um Forum yearly which says when you
execute a contract who provides the
computing power to process the function
normally when I write a function and run
it it's my PC or server I arrange that's
burning some CPU Cycles how does that
work with colorbox
is the question like during testing or
do you mean like when the contract is
actually running
I feel like they are probably referring
to when the contract is running
execute yeah when Tyler like deployed
the contract on chain he uploaded he
uploaded all of that the code onto not
the compiled version of the contract
onto the chain and then when he invoked
it he was giving the contract he was
giving he was telling the chain like go
and run this code so the code is running
on all of the nodes of the network and
the nodes are all agreeing on like this
is the outcome of running that that
contract got it got it
um decentralization
there are one more question that came in
here which says
um how sorbon adopted zero knowledge
grouping
soroban supports
yeah I think we're like very interested
I think in in supporting like
different uh crypto Primitives and
um if you go and have a look in the the
Discord you know with there have been
some conversations around like what
crypto Primitives should we be
supporting you know how for supporting
things like that
um right now the only crypto Primitives
implemented is available uh
in the sorbin SDK are just the really
basic ones that you would typically see
in the Stellar ecosystem today things
like shell 256 and add 25519 keys but
we're definitely very interested in
finding out like you know what people
want or see that they need and we have
ideas about what can be added and you
know we'll definitely be looking into
that yep
see I think that is about all the
questions that there are anyone else
have any final questions here
I'd be curiously as you kind of have a
really broad knowledge of sorobon where
it's going and you're working with
internal and external teams on road maps
and
are there things you'd really like to
see people work on or provide feedback
for or what's kind of the most exciting
thing that comes across your desk as far
as Community engagement or things that
people are doing or maybe areas of
opportunity that you feel like people
maybe aren't quite recognizing yet that
you'd like to ensure that people are
aware of
and like what would you like to see come
through sarbanathon
yeah I think
um definitely the big ticket thing is
writing contracts like getting more
people writing contracts providing
feedback around uh what they've found uh
convenient or inconvenient around what
they have found
um to be uh you know conceptually made
sense you know they wanted to do X and
the SDK helped them to do xor or didn't
help them to do that or got in their way
we def like that that's I think probably
the biggest thing is is dog fooding
um writing contracts and discovering
what's missing what the gaps are all
that sort of stuff that's what uh really
interests me and I've seen like a lot of
good posts on this sorry I can't even
say this sorry bethon
um
that have been very interesting and and
you know people exploring how does
authentication work
um and ex providing examples of where it
works really well where it's you know
got some rough edges and and like that's
that's fantastic because that gives us
all as a community the opportunity to
figure out what needs to change between
now where we're at right now future now
version one what needs to change between
now and getting to test now and pub now
down the road
yeah absolutely we actually had that
exact uh example come through uh this
week I believe uh there you go wow Raph
is already on it uh like sharing the
links to it but yeah no definitely like
I think we wanna the whole reason for
sore monathon to exist is like simply to
help with the development and like dog
fooding sorbon to like the ecosystem and
then to let our Dev team
um know how can they actually take it
and improve Sargon right like we're
listening basically
um I see another question here which
says oh uh yeah um I think Connie Nets
you have the right answer there uh where
it is would SCF allow the next round is
lower Bond related projects
um that's probably like a it I would say
yes probably but don't quote me on that
um but yeah I'd say well we'll support
once once it hits mainnet because the
point of SCF is
um to run live businesses uh kind of in
production and if you're please don't
run a production level business on a
test net or a futurenet so be working on
your business ideas now you can't just
spin up a business in a month some of
you probably could
um so that there's like get started get
ready so that whenever there isn't a CF
round that is accepting
um because they're that are built on top
of Sarah bonathon sorobon wow it's not
called sarobon anymore now it's just
Sarah bonathon
um
how the tables turn uh then then we'll
be ready to accept those those inbounds
but it's definitely coming
um we just want to encourage people
building businesses on top of
test Nets that said I would love to
potentially we were just at like since
this is like uh I consider this like a
very casual conversation with our
community but we're considering maybe
doing like a hackathon in the future by
Future I mean like next month
um or the month after uh where basically
it would be for you to come up with
those ideas you can submit proposal sore
Bond related ideas and like do example
contracts and so on and so forth so we'd
really like to see you like we don't
want to stop you from ideating at the
moment so if you had ideas please start
working on them because there will come
a time when we want those ideas uh
brought to us uh from the community we
want to support you the best way we can
so yeah yeah and I'd say we'll probably
like surabana Thon is sort of bonathon
First Light we're gonna run more right
the next one will be sorobanathon
super tools or something where where
we're coming up with like a new theme
new new funding round looking for a
different type of content and one of
those might be some of the tooling that
that we really want to to see on the
network some of that like opens Upland
type contracts as the as the platform
continues to mature and change less
um it'll become safer I guess to begin
writing more of these mature uh
production ready contracts but we've got
to be careful in the sequencing of
things that we don't write contracts
that are just going to be constantly
breaking or make it kind of
disincentivize an environment from
breaking things in order to improve the
final product so you want to keep things
a little platoy in uh in the first in
the first early stages so that so that
it's fine to constantly be breaking
things because nobody's built anything
to mature yet
the pub net is the takeaway here I guess
um but yeah I think that is everything
for this week y'all once again Sarah
bonathon is still a thing it's happening
it's going to keep happening and keep
playing when tinkering with sarmon like
you literally can earn excellent for
doing that I don't know why you aren't
like I said I'm always ready to quit my
job and start working on sarban but
um I do like my job I like talking about
it
but yeah anyways y'all thank you all for
joining uh we will be back next week um
on Friday with senso actually talking
about his assembly script SDK so stay
tuned for more details on that uh we're
really excited and that's always a good
time to just ask questions uh in general
about sarban well that's sarban thanks
that's a wrap on store Bond talks yeah
thank you thanks a bunch see ya new here
Lee